1. HOW DO HEPA FILTERS WORK?
A portable HEPA filter is a box with a filter and fan inside it. The
fan pulls the air through the filter and then supplies the air back to
the space. The filter removes particles from the air. These particles
can include dust, allergens, smoke, mold, bacteria or respiratory
particles that contain viruses.
It does not remove any gasses like carbon dioxide. A more detailed
introduction to filtration can be found here.
2. HOW DO YOU SELECT A HEPA FILTER?
The most important property is the clean air delivery rate (CADR).
AHAM recommends you follow the 2/3 rule. Take the area of the space in
square feet, and multiply it by 2/3 to get the necessary CADR in cubic
feet per minute (CFM). So if the space is 200 sq ft, CADR = 200 2/3 =
133 CFM. Getting one that is AHAM Verifide ensures 3rd party testing
and reliable values.
In a typical commercial space with 9 foot ceilings, the 2/3 rule gives
you 4.5 air changes per hour (ACH). This is a reasonable amount that
would likely combine with ventilation for at least 6 ACH.
https://schools.forhealth.org/risk-reduction-strategies-for-reopening-schools/healthy-buildings/
Be careful about some claims. For example, Austin HM400 advertises the
fan is 400 CFM, but with the filter, the CADR (they call it True Air
Flow Rate) is 250 CFM. By AHAM standards, that would be good for an
area of 250 3/2 = 375 sq ft, but they use their own standard and claim
it is sufficient for 1500 sq ft. That would give you 1.1 ACH in a
typical commercial space with 9 foot ceilings, much lower than the 4.5
ACH used by AHAM.
The second important factor is noise. Here’s a rough guide as
recommended by Clean Air Stars:
< 40 dBA — sleep
< 45 dbA — Classroom, Quiet Restaurant & Office
< 50 dBA —Loud office & Childcare
< 60 dBA — Loud restaurant or gym
> 60 dBA — Acceptable for loud environments
See the noise section below for how to select HEPA filters to ensure
appropriate noise.
The third factor is cost. More expensive ones are often worse. Typical
ones you can find at the hardware store are likely to be more cost
effective than high end ones.
The final factor is additional features, which should be avoided. See
FAQ #9.
FAQ #17 lists resources to select HEPA filters.
3. DO HEPA FILTERS BLOW THE VIRUS AROUND?
It’s already being blown around. People don’t usually feel or see
that air is moving, but you can see airborne dust reflecting in
sunlight to get a better idea how particles can move around a room.
The same applies for smoking — if there’s a smoker in the room,
the smoke will travel around you will eventually be inhaling the
smoke. Typical indoor air speeds are 0.1–0.2 m/s. Consequently, any
indoor air pollutant is already floating around the room.
The goal when designing ventilation systems is that the room is
perfectly mixed — all pollutants are evenly distributed throughout
the room. This also means that clean air is properly dispersed
throughout the room and that when exhausting air, you will be
extracting contaminated air instead of exhausting clean air and
letting areas to build up with higher pollutant concentrations.
Studies show that the well-mixed assumption is correct for small
particle sizes.
This is why one of the core recommendations of ASHRAE is to mix the
air in the room and the CDC recommends the use of fans (FAQ 11 on
their webpage). Because HEPA filters use fans, they can increase
airflow and mixing in a room which is a good thing.
The one caveat is that you do not want to create direct currents
between people as anyone downwind will be placed at increased risk.
The two options are to purchase a HEPA filter that blows up or place
it where it is not blowing close to anyone (within 2 m or 6 ft).
4. DO HEPA FILTERS MAKE THE VIRUS TRAVEL FURTHER?
No. The virus will travel around the room with or without a HEPA
fitler or fan. What the HEPA filter or fan will do is make it mix into
the room at a quicker rate. This will help mitigate the risk of
short-range transmission (see FAQ #13) and will help ensure clean air
is better distributed throughout the room.
When placing a HEPA filter, ensure you are not creating direct
currents between two people as the person downwind will be at
increased risk.
5. DO HEPA FILTERS INTERFERE WITH VENTILATION?
No. The vast majority of systems are are mixing ventilation. The goal
is to have the air in the room properly mixed. HEPA filters would
further increase the mixing of the air which would ensure pollutants
are properly removed from the room.
There are rarely used ventilation systems which are called
stratification ventilation or displacement ventilation where cool air
is supplied near the floor and it slowly warms up, rises and is
extracted at the ceiling. The goal is to have a constant upwards
current in the room. A HEPA filter would be detrimental in that case
since the goal is not to have horizontal flow of air. These systems
are not common.
Mixing ventilation on the left side where air is supplied and
exhausted at the ceiling. Displacement ventilation on the right side
where cool air is supplied near the floor and it is exhausted at the
ceiling.
Although it is possible that in very rare circumstances, using a HEPA
filter can overall have a worse effect, the vast majority of cases
(>99%), it will improve the clean air delivery rate and improve the
air mixing in the space.
6. DOES UV LIGHT HELP WHEN COMBINED WITH A HEPA FILTER?
Not really. To be rated a HEPA filter, it needs to remove more than
99.95% of particles. Even if the UV light successfully disinfects the
remaining 0.05%, the effect on the clean air delivery rate would be
negligible. Some UV devices are not properly designed and the UV light
would not deliver a sufficient dose to inactivate pathogens. While
there are portable air cleaners that exclusively use UV light to
disinfect the air and are effective, the effect of combining HEPA
filtration with UV light is unlikely to provide any meaningful
benefit.
7. DO I NEED TO WORRY ABOUT GETTING COVID FROM VIRUSES COMING OFF A
HEPA FILTER?
No. This effect is known as resuspension. Virus particles are
initially floating in the air and then deposit on the filter when
pulled through. They can then become concentrated on the filter. If
the filter is then disturbed, the virus particles can get resuspended
and infect anyone nearby.
There is currently no evidence that this is a significant risk.
Furthermore, virus particles decay over time, so if the filter has
trapped virus particles, unless it was in the very recent past, it is
unlikely to be able to cause infection. A much more significant risk
would be to share a room with an infectious person without appropriate
mitigation measures in place, like portable air cleaners.
When changing filters, it is good practice to wear a respirator and do
it in a well ventilated environment as dust can become resuspended
which can have harmful effects when inhaled.
8. SHOULD I GET A MEDICAL GRADE HEPA FILTER, TRUE HEPA OR H14?
Medical grade HEPA and True HEPA are just other names for HEPA filters
rated H13. This is the standard rating for HEPA filters, so medical
grade HEPA or True HEPA are just marketing names.
There are H14 HEPA filters which can filter 99.995% of particles
instead of just 99.95%. This benefit is negligible in all normal
situations, but might be relevant in certain laboratories. There is no
need for general use of H14.
More information about HEPA filter ratings can be found here.
9. SHOULD I GET ONE WITH ADDITIONAL FEATURES LIKE IONIZATION, PLASMA,
NCCO, PCO, HYDROXYLATION?
No. Portable air cleaners often come with additional features. These
involve some mechanism to supply reactive species to the space. The
goal is they will interact with virus particles and cause them to
inactivate or deposit on surfaces or filters.
Many of these technologies have poor evidence of effectiveness. Even
claims of 99.999% reduction can still mean that HEPA filters are more
than 10x more effective.
There is also evidence that many of these technologies can produce
indoor air pollutants like formaldehyde and ozone. See this article
for an in-depth review.
The CDC recommends caution with these technologies. The Ontario
Society or Professional Engineers recommends these technologies are
not used until there is a standard for safety and effectiveness.
OSPE IAQ core recommendation to not use additive air cleaning
technologies until there is a standardized way to ensure their safety
and effectiveness.
10. WHAT ARE THE MAIN PROBLEMS WITH HEPA FILTERS?
The three main problems with HEPA filters are noise, distribution and
human operation.
See FAQ #11 to address noise.
There is a concern with short-circuiting — that clean air supplied
directly returns to the intake of the HEPA filter and does not mix
within the space. Proper air distribution can prevent
short-circuiting. To achieve proper distribution, some of the
following strategies can help:
     multiple HEPA filters can be spread out throughout the space
     they can be combined with fans that distribute the air better
     they should be placed properly. See FAQ#11
Having portable air cleaners in a space requires people to turn them
on and off. To ensure this is being done properly, the portable air
cleaner needs to be selected to be noise appropriate for the space.
This needs to be combined with proper training, signage and
verification policies to ensure they are running properly.
11. HOW DO YOU ADDRESS NOISE?
The easiest way to address noise is to purchase multiple HEPA filters
and run them on low. They still need to be sized properly for the
space. More details can be found here.
Another alternative is to use a portable air cleaner with PC fans and
either DIY it or purchase it from Clean Air Kits.
12. WHERE SHOULD IT BE PLACED?
It’s impossible to know the perfect place to put it without a
computational fluid dynamics model or fog experiments, but they are
still very effective, even if not in the ideal place. Here are some
placement guidelines:
     Best to have one that blows air up
     If blowing sideways, best not to aim it at anyone.
     If it’s in the direction of someone, keep at least 2m (6 ft) away
     Centre of the room is best
     Don’t blow into a wall or object
     Raised is better than on the floor
     Give at least 0.5 m (1.5’) clearance from walls or objects that
could restrict flow
     Keep away from other sources of clean air: open windows, supply air
vents, other HEPA filters
     If you have multiple, space them out.
     Make sure there’s no obstruction to where the air is going (like
under a table)
     In classrooms, there’s usually plenty of room at the front.
     Sometimes it’s better to move it a bit away from people if it
allows you to run it on a higher speed because of noise
13. ARE HEPA FILTERS USELESS AGAINST SHORT-RANGE TRANSMISSION?
No. Short range transmission is higher risk because the virus is more
concentrated in the initial exhaled plume by the infectious person. To
mitigate short-range transmission, this plume needs to be diluted
quickly. In order to accomplish this, two things are required: clean
air in the space and good airflow in the space. Good airflow will
dilute the initial plume quickly and it should be replaced by clean
air in the space.
A HEPA filter can assist on both of these measures. It will ensure the
virus concentration in the space will be lower. Because it uses a fan,
it will improve airflow throughout the space. Depending on the size of
the space and the HEPA filter, this effect might be small, but it can
still help.
Overall air quality improvements help mitigate short range
transmission.
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/ina.12946
14. I HEARD IT DOESN’T WORK ON VIRUSES BECAUSE IT ONLY WORKS ON
PARTICLES DOWN TO 0.3 ΜM AND VIRUSES ARE SMALLER THAN THAT.
There are different physical mechanisms which allow filters to trap
particles. The different mechanisms work best on different particle
sizes.
The combination of these mechanisms is worst at 0.3 µm. Filtration is
more effective on particles with both larger and smaller diameter.
Because of this, HEPA filters are tested on particles 0.3 µm in
diameter.
Filtration efficiency of different filters based on particle diameter.
The left graph shows the efficiency of various MERV rated filters. The
right graph shows a HEPA rated filter.
https://www.ashrae.org/technical-resources/filtration-disinfection
In summary, HEPA filters do a better job against particles below 0.3
µm. The misconception that they don’t work below 0.3 µm is because
they perform worst on particles that are 0.3 µm, so that is the size
they are tested on.
15. IS IT DANGEROUS TO SIT NEAR A HEPA FILTER BECAUSE IT WILL DRAW THE
VIRUS NEAR YOU?
No. In general, the air in the room should be assumed to be well-mixed
and the air that is being brought in to the HEPA filter is the same as
the air you would be breathing if you were in the middle of the room.
However, short-circuiting is an established problem with air cleaning
equipment that does not have proper distribution built in, like HEPA
filters. Short-circuiting occurs when clean air supplied from the HEPA
filter does not properly mix into the space, but instead circulates
back to the return. This would mean that air near the HEPA filter is
cleaner than the average air in the room and it would be lower risk to
be adjacent to a HEPA filter.
16. “WE HAVE MECHANICAL VENTILATION, SO WE DON’T NEED A HEPA
FILTER”
If a room has mechanical ventilation, it does not mean there is an
appropriate level of clean air supplied. Mechanical ventilation can
have various issues:
     Current standards are not designed for airborne disease mitigation,
only comfort. ASHRAE is currently developing a standard for airborne
disease mitigation because its existing air quality standard does not
address that. ASHRAE is used in building codes in North America.
     Older buildings were not designed to comply with modern minimum
requirements. Even with mechanical ventilation, they often have very
poor ventilation levels.
     Having mechanical ventilation does not mean it is operating
properly.
Consequently, to provide appropriate risk, there are two things
facilities should do. First, select an airborne mitigation standard
and comply with it. Examples of standards are 6 air changes per hour
(OSPE, Lancet, Harvard Healthy Buildings) or 10 litres/sec/person
(WHO).
Second, there should be ongoing verification that the systems are
operating as designed. The best way to do this is by monitoring
ventilation with CO2.
If facilities are complying with an airborne disease mitigation
standard and verifying proper operation, then it is reasonable for
them to state that they have provided a reasonably low risk
environment and do not want to add portable air cleaners to their
strategy.
If there is no compliance to a standard for airborne disease
mitigation, HEPA filters can assist in achieving those goals. If there
is no verification, HEPA filters can provide an additional layer of
protection if the systems are not running properly.
17. WHAT GOOD RESOURCES ARE THERE TO PICK HEPA FILTERS?
Some good resources are:
     Clean Air Stars
     Clean Air Crew
     Comparison of HEPA filters by Marwa Zaatari
18. DO PERSONAL HEPA FILTERS WORK?
In general, not really. There are two ways to use personal HEPA
filters: a small HEPA filter in a large room that is close to you or
having one blowing in your face.
If a small HEPA filter is used in a large room, the air close to it
might be slightly cleaner than the rest of the room, but unlikely to
be very meaningful.
If you are pointing one at your face, it depends on the filter and how
close it is. This is data that was taken by Clean Air Stars using the
QT3.
To get a meaningful reduction, the distance needs to be within 40 cm
of your face. That is very close and not sustainable for a long period
of time. They ran another test with a DIY PC fan array which showed
much better results.
This one has over 80% particle reduction at 1.5 m away. A much more
reasonable distance. It is likely that this option is better because
the fan array gives it a much larger area. This is a legitimate option
as opposed to most HEPA filters which supply air from a relatively
smaller area with higher air speed.
This deals with a more general issue — when clean air is supplied
from a point, how far will it travel before the clean air becomes well
mixed with the surrounding air. One example which has good data is the
gasper or personal air outlet found in airplanes. Does it work to use
it like a personal HEPA filter and aim it at your face? This is what
the ASHRAE epidemic task force has to say about it:
In summary, clean air mixes into the space pretty quickly. Using it
might help a bit but not significantly.
